---
title: "Perry & Sherlock & James"
date: 2020-07-03 12:34 -0800
---
I kept trying to find an entry point into "Perry Mason," a new big money show that piles cliché on top of cliché, and I couldn't, except to wonder when a character is no longer a character. Lemme explain.

"Perry Mason" is a rebooted something or other from HBO and based on pulp novels from generations gone by. He's your grandparents favorite lawyer. A CBS television series ran from 1957&ndash;66 and was in turn based on a Warner Bros. radio show and film series were adapted from novels by Erle Stanley Gardner. There's a legacy here. Yet HBO's effort jettisons all of it, keeping only the hero's name. The Perry Mason on our Sunday nights is no longer a lawyer. He's a private detective, and a shabby, drunken one at that, with a wholly new backstory (still in Los Angeles, yes, but now on a family farm and burdened with shell shock from the Great War).

A coupla weeks ago the estate of Arthur Conan Doyle sued the producers of the upcoming XX, which is based, partly, on Conan Doyle's original Sherlock Holmes stories. The new movie? show? introduces Holme's niece as the heroine. It sounds fine, like a gender bent riff on "Young Sherlock Holmes" from the mid-80s. The estate worried the producers changed Sherlock too much, and doing so somehow infringes on bits of ownership they have over a character otherwise in the public domain. It's a dumb lawsuit but it raises an interesting question about the essence of fictional characters. In this case, what makes Sherlock exactly Sherlock. His Sherlockness, if you will.

So what's at the center of Perry Mason? [ fill in ! ]

A rumor floated last month that James Bond will become a father in "XXX," the next entry in that interminable franchise. Bond is an obvious power fantasy for teen boys and immature men. His fictional life is every man's secret dream, days of sex and violence free of consequence, with a healthy dose (!) of so-called exotic locations and ostentatious luxury. The frachise's jackoff appeal lies in state-sanctioned murder and pure hedonism. You can sit and watch and imagine yourself as a real cool killer and total "ladie's man." That's what makes it fun. That's the point, and I'll watch Bond wander the world and stroke along with every other fan, and keep my objections to essays like this one. But a collicky baby and dirty diapers are a helluva consequence and decidedly not fun (and not cinematic, either, but whatever). Re-imagining the character as James Bond Sr. runs contrary to his premise, to the entirety of the movie franchise and Ian Fleming's novels.

Toward the end of the first episode of "Perry Mason," he tells YY, his ZZ, "Ispa scientia potestas est." Which would be bad writing in any context, a character spouting themes in dialogue. In this case it's a shining light on the heart of the show's problem: That line is generic as they come. It describes every crime mystery noir whatever ever made. It doesn't help viewers understand anything about this man or his drives or his world. It coulda been said by anybody, a rebooted Sam Spade, Bulldog Drummond, or Lew Archer. It coulda been some rando named Doghouse Reilly and it wouldn't have made a difference to anyone inside the show or out of it. So why should we care? This Perry Mason is less a bold  reinterpretation of an age-old character and more an exercise in corporate branding.
