---
title: "'Minari' is a sweet memory"
date: "2021-05-01 09:01 -0800"
---
During the summer of 1983, Jacob Yi, a Korean immigrant, moves wife Monica, daughter Anne, son David (and later, his wife's mother) to a farm in Arkansas. He wants to provide them a better life than he could in California, and his idea is to do it by chasing his dream: by working 50,000 acres, by growing and selling produce for a burgeoning Korean population in the States. Jacob's dream is a literal American dream, maybe the first one we had as a country. About the land, about building something of your own. The dream requires hard work and sheer will, it demands open spaces and endless horizons. It's also an idea of ourselves and what we can do, what's possible, reshaped and reimagined as we go.

The parents work at a nearby factory farm alongside other Koreans while Jacob gets his acreage going. The family lives in a double-wide (and oh! Monica's face when she first sees where they'll be living). They speak Korean at home, switching easily into English time and again, and they wear American clothes and eat Korean food. At night, they watch Korean television on VHS. When an old song plays on a variety program, Grandma notes YY. She fawns elaborately over the recollection. Mom and Dad react with a careful indifference. If they ignore the sentiment expressed, if they deny the memory, they won't need to think about it or feel it.

Quiet emotions are at the core, and out of all the elements in "Minari," they ring truest. Writer-director Lee Isaac Chung intially sought to adapt Willa Cather's "My Ántonia," an early 20th century novel about European immigrants on the Great Plains. It also touched on memory. Instead, he wrote an original work based on his own family and his own experience. I think he got a little closer to Tennessee Williams than Willa Cather, at least in spirit. "Minari" is often an insular family drama on a single set.

Each of Chung's characters straddle several worlds, so, yes, the movie is in part about immigration and assimilation, the friction around custom, language, and appearance in a new land. But it's also about the conflict between past and present, between memory and identity. Who you were in Korea is different from who you were in California, and again different from who you might become in Arkansas. When you reimagine yourself at each stop, your needs change. Your wants change.



The best scenes are between the parents, their conflict between who they are now and who they were, and how what they need and what they want changed over time. 'Minari' is based on director's XX childhood. It's about his literal memory as well as the very idea of memory, how memory can sometimes contradict identity.
