---
title: "Matinee (Universal, 1993)"
slug: "matinee-1993-id-rather-watch-mant-tbh"
excerpt: "\"Matinee\" is Joe Dante's paen to schlock horror, William Castle, the Atomic Era, and I don't know why or what for."
tags: comedy, horror, teen, romance
---

~~Steven Spielberg's~~ Joe Dante's paen to 1950s horror, to movies and movie theaters, to the Atomic Era, and I don't know why or what for. The movie's okay. It's fine. But there isn't a compelling reason for it, either. Dante and screenwriter Charles S Hass take the safest route they can find through the material, and the result is...you know what? Harmless. Soft hearted and rosey and inoffensive and fine family viewing. Which is weird, for a movie about movies, a light comedy set during the Cold War. And also because Dante and Haas made "Gremlins II" together, a monster movie of a kind, one with an edgy exhuberance "Matinee" doesn't have and could've used.

The film headlines John Goodman as Lawrence Woolsey, a character in the spirit of B-movie impresario [William Castle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Castle). Woolsey makes schlock and promotes it tirelessly, and he employs similar gimmicks to Castle's: theaters rigged with extra sound and lighting effects, electronic buzzers in the seats, costumed extras running up and down the aisles, etc etc. He turns local theaters into carnivals and positions himself as barker, and approaches his audience with an exaggerated flourish. It's fun to see him work the crowd or promote himself in coming attractions. Goodman plays it fine. The part doesn't stretch him beyond his previous comedic roles, as the character is a huckster with heart, a guy who believes in what he's selling.

That's where I run into a little trouble, really, as Woolsey arrives in Key West, Fla, to peddle "Mant," his newest atomic monster movie, showing up right in the middle of the Cuban Missile Crisis. "Matinee" doesn't have much to say about its subjects. How could it? You can't really photograph and dramatize somebody's unabashed love of the movies, of single screen theaters, of time gone by. The movie treats the Cold War as backdrop, a period tie-in to "Mant's" radioactive premise. There's a few coming-of-age stories involving local teen boys and their romantic aspirations toward local teen girls, and these plots are similar to the rest---well executed and well structured but ultimately shallow and without insight. "Mant," the film-within-a-film, is presented broadly, as a parody, which I think is a conceptual mistake. (If you love schlock horror and find value in it, as the filmmakers presumably do, then why present it as an unsophisticated joke?) I want to like "Matinee" because it's a sweet natured movie about loving some of the same things I love, and as a comedy I smiled at it more than I laughed with it, but I spent most of the runtime thinking of other movies.
