---
layout: post
title: "Oof, I say, oof---James Gray speaks to Deadline about the current slate"
description: "I dunno. He's not wrong, but he's still wrong."
---
In a [short video](https://deadline.com/video/armageddon-time-james-gray-cannes-film-festival-box-office-streaming/), director James Gray covers box office and streaming content, film festivals and award shows, and loosely describes why, to paraphrase, "studios should be able to lose money on art specialty divisions." Gray just debuted his latest at a major international film festival. I am writing this in a small apartment while still in my pajamas, so I'm in no position to tell him what's what. He's smart and articulate here, and makes good conventional sense, but then I think he's also only ["correct"](https://twitter.com/SeanFennessey/status/1528526055916466176) under the narrowest of terms and strictest definitions. I find his viewpoint weirdly insular, another reflection of a twitchy and defensive film culture. (So I guess I will tell him what's what after all, and you too.)

Gray argues that major studios alienated part of their audience when they gave the theatrical space over to broad based genre flicks. In turn, people lost the habit of going to the movies. He suggests a wider variety of smaller films could be seen as an investment, and studios should be willing to lose money on them. Nothing wrong with superheroes. They're fine. But non-commercial films with potential might expand the audience over the longer term. Spend a little now, get back more later. What we have today, with narrow appeal and shrinking attendance, makes movies less culturally relevant. Gray cites Francis Ford Coppola's "The Godfather" and Ang Lee's "The Ice Storm" to bolster portions of his argument.

He begins by saying, "Theatrical is essential." Right there I could stop and write an entirely separate rebuttal, because...essential to whom, exactly? Can't be the vaguely theater-going public of our collective imagination. Their failure to show up is the whole problem, right? The underlying idea at play---that the theatrical experience is core to the medium---is often expressed by specialists, those filmmakers and critics and ardent fans, while they pontificate about the cinema as religion, the theater as its church. The kinda thing you might hear, too, from #filmtwitter bros and Letterboxd dorks (or Hollywood directors at Cannes). You must be a real _afición,_ a fetishist who rambles on about film stock and aspect ratios, or one of the cloistered few, another industry bobblehead or scattered academic, to believe in the movie theater as "essential."

Phew. _Cinema._ Do I really need to genuflect before the silver screen to have a good time? Dip my fingers into a bowl of anointed popcorn butter and solemnly make the high sign to pass an arbitrary shibboleth? I just wanna go to the movies. Or watch them at home. Fill my soul with high art. Or kill an evening. Theatrical may be essential to the select, but it isn't to most. A commercial artist should travel to where the audience lives, and not, ya know, necessarily force them into a windowless room.

(I would also challenge Gray or Nolan or the New York Critics Circle, or anyone with a big platform who speaks to this, to spend a month in a tertiary market, paying full price at the local dead mall megaplex, and seeing nothing but studio tentpoles. Then come back and talk to us about the essential quality of the theatrical experience.)

Next: "If you look at the streaming movies that do the best, they are the movies that come out in theaters first. So that should tell you something." Yes. It tells me theatrical releases get an unholy amount of support from their studios in terms of booking and advertising. (If they don't, they're fucked.) This ties directly into his mention of "The Ice Storm" later in the clip. I wish the interviewer had point blanked him with, "And how do you advertise a movie like that in 2022?" Because unbelievable advertising costs are an issue no one addresses. (It makes for awkward talk in conversations that casually assume some level of "art" in all things.) Imagine if a studio took one of their blockbuster budgets and said, well, let's roll the dice on 5 or 10 smaller films instead. They'd likely spend more money telling people about those movies than it cost to make them, and all that effort wouldn't lessen the risk on opening weekend. So why do it? For art? We're talking about movie studios here, and movie studios owned by massive, international conglomerates.

I suspect Gray knows all this. In fact, I'm almost sure he does, because he tips his hand a little toward the end of the video, when he says, "TKTK."
