---
layout: post
title: "'Theatrical is essential,' says James Gray"
excerpt: "He's not wrong, but he's still wrong."
emoji: "🍿"
date: 2022-05-23 11:23
---
In a [short video](https://deadline.com/video/armageddon-time-james-gray-cannes-film-festival-box-office-streaming/), director James Gray covers box office and streaming content, festivals and awards, and loosely describes why, to paraphrase, "studios should be able to lose money on art specialty divisions." Gray is a major filmmaker who just debuted his latest at an international festival. He is smart and articulate here, and makes good sense. I am writing this in a small apartment while still in my pajamas. I'm in no position to tell James Gray what's what. And yet...he's only ["correct, as always"](https://twitter.com/SeanFennessey/status/1528526055916466176) under the narrowest of terms and the strictest of definitions. I find the viewpoint weirdly insular, another reflection of a twitchy and defensive film culture.<!--more-->

Gray argues major studios alienated their audience when they gave the theatrical space over to broad based genre flicks. Your boy wizards and impossible missions shut out everything else, and now there is nothing else. With an unchanging selection, the larger public turned away and eventually lost "the habit of going to the movies." He suggests smaller films as an investment in the theatrical future, and that studios should be willing to lose money on those films. Nothing wrong with superheroes. They're fine. But non-commercial work with potential might pay dividends. Spend, grow, reap. The model we have today, with its narrow appeal and shrinking attendance, renders the movies less vital, and creates its own trouble, a sorta cinematic death spiral. Gray cites Francis Ford Coppola's "The Godfather" and Ang Lee's "The Ice Storm" to bolster his arguments around relevance and scope.

He begins by saying, "Theatrical is essential." Right there I could stop and write an entirely separate rebuttal, because...essential to whom, exactly? Can't be the vaguely theater-going public of our collective imagination. Their failure to show up is the whole problem, right? The underlying idea at play---that the theatrical experience is core to the medium---is often expressed by insiders. Industry (directors!) and adjacent (critics!) who only see films at studio previews and press screenings, or between hobnobs at international festivals. "Theatrical is essential" lives within the steady province of #filmtwitter bros and Letterboxd dorks, self-appointed _aficións_ rambling on about cinema as religion, about movie theaters as church. Given the reality of premium tickets, block booking, noisy patrons, limited matinees, expensive concessions, cell phones, low wages, ubiquitous DCP, and the soul crushing unappeal of the dead mall megaplex, well, you absolutely must be a true believer to see a movie theater as essential.

Phew. _Cinema._ Do I really need to genuflect before the silver screen to have a good time? Dip my fingers into a bowl of anointed popcorn butter and solemnly make the high sign to pass an arbitrary shibboleth? I just wanna go to the movies. Or watch them at home. Fill my soul. Or kill an evening. Theatrical may be an absolute to the select, but it isn't to most. A commercial artist should go where the audience lives, I think, and not force them into a windowless room.

Next: "If you look at the streaming movies that do the best, they are the movies that come out in theaters first. So that should tell you something." Yes. It tells me theatrical releases get ungodly support in terms of booking and advertising. (Mostly because if they don't, they're dead.) This ties directly into Gray's example of "The Ice Storm" as a smaller film with limited prospects. I wish the interviewer had hit him with, "And how do you advertise a movie like that in 2022?" Because Gray doesn't address contemporary marketing costs, or talk about the difficulty in reaching a fractured audience across dozens of networks, channels, platforms, timezones, and locations.

Imagine if a studio took one of their blockbuster budgets and decided, well, let's produce 5 or 10 smaller films instead. They'd probably spend more money telling people about those movies than it cost to make them, and all the effort wouldn't reduce their risk on opening weekend. Paramount tried a variation of this strategy around 2018. It lost them an estimated half a billion dollars. So why would anyone else do it? For art? For an imaginary audience? We're talking about movie studios here.

Gray knows this, I think, because he tips his hand toward the end of the video, when he contrasts "The Godfather" against "Aquaman" to describe Hollywood's waning influence, and when he explains the decline in award show viewership. "It's going down because we did not make the investment in the broad based engagement with the product," he says. Gray's not wrong in an immediate sense, because "Aquaman" is quite forgettable and the movies have always have been something of a product. But what type of product are we talking about here? A movie produced in 1972 is not the same as a movie produced in 2018; the intentions behind them are too different.

"The Godfather" was a standalone feature, never intended to be more than an adaptation of a popular novel. "Aquaman" partially operates as an advertisement for every link in Warner's DCU chain. One of these products requires accolades and attention to maintain its cultural relevance. The other doesn't need them at all, because its relevance is derived from itself, and will last for the life of the parent brand. The audience for award ceremonies didn't drop because of studio neglect.
