---
title: "Who knew Art Carney had range?"
slug: "the-late-show-1977-who-knew-art-carney-had-range"
excerpt: "Well, presumably, Academy voters. But did you? If not, \"The Late Show\" will demonstrate."
tags: noir, mystery
---

"The Late Show" (Warners, 1977) is a good little show, with a vibe straight from the pulps. Art Carney plays Ira Wells, an aged private detective in Los Angeles, and Lily Tomlin is Margo Sterling, a New Hollywood flake who dogs him about a cat. The plot is appropriately complex and builds to a satisfying finish. The movie is worth watching if you're a fan of either Carney or Tomlin, or neo-noirs from the 1970s.

"The Late Show" has a TV cast and a TV title and sometimes a movie-of-the-week feel. The scope is small. A half dozen characters worry over a mystery that means nothing to nobody. Carney's Ira Wells becomes involved when a friend appears on his doorstep gutshot and dying. Later, Tomlin's Margo tries to hire him to find her improbably missing cat. Ira refuses, because who the hell would take that job? But she persists. "I get $25 a day plus expenses because I'm the best and I get paid like the best," he says, and despite looking like a moth eaten Marlowe, I believed him. The story kicks up when a pair of goons arrive at Ira's rented rooms looking for Margo, but suddenly turn on each other and begin shooting. One guy falls dead on the front lawn, the other bolts, and then...

Wait a sec, did somebody really just get shot over a missing cat? Yes and no. One of the film's pleasures is in how writer-director Robert Benton fleshes out the larger story, which includes home invasion, murder, theft, blackmail, and a small pile of double crosses. Ira searches for his friend's killer (and Tomlin's cat) and discovers the dead guy on the lawn might be connected to an uglier crime, and that ugly might have gotten his pal murdered. The script does run into occasional trouble when key players are referenced in dialogue without ever appearing on screen; this renders some plot points difficult to follow.

The movie is dialogue heavy and exposition heavy, but my favorite moments, and there's a lot of them, are character driven and not plot driven. Benson's Los Angeles is a seedy and run down, a place with no money and no future. His characters are trapped in it. The movie contains a level of violence that's mild by today's standards, but the way Benson throws around the blood packs, a couple of punches can have real weight behind them. There's also a level of implied violence. The characters swap nasty stories about the home invasion at the center of the mystery, and late in the movie, Ira stumbles into an apartment with a very long blood trail in the hallway.
