---
title: "'The Late Show' is a good little show"
slug: "the-late-show-1977-who-knew-art-carney-had-range"
excerpt: "A TV cast and a TV title and sometimes a movie-of-the-week feel, but worth watching if you're a fan of the stars or the period."
tags: noir, mystery
---

"The Late Show" (Warners, 1977) is a 90 minute vibe straight from the pulps. Art Carney plays Ira Wells, an aged private detective in Los Angeles. Lily Tomlin is Margo Sterling, a New Hollywood flake who dogs him about a cat. An occasionally convoluted plot builds to a satisfying finish. The movie is worth watching if you're a fan of either Carney or Tomlin, or neo-noirs from the 1970s.

The film has a TV cast and a TV title and sometimes a movie-of-the-week feel. The scope is small. A half dozen characters worry over a mystery that means nothing to nobody. Carney's detective becomes involved when a friend appears literally dying on his doorstep. Soon after, Tomlin's Margo asks him to find her lost pet. He refuses, she persists. There's some back and forth over her case. (Imagine a moth eaten Marlowe arguing with a SoCal chick who 10 to 1 smells of patchouli and weed.) A little later a pair of goons show up at Ira's looking for Margo, but then suddenly turn on one another and begin shooting. One guy falls dead on the front lawn, the other bolts, and then...

Wait, did somebody really get shot over a missing cat? Yes and no. Writer-director Robert Benton takes his time fleshing out the larger story, which includes home invasion, murder, theft, blackmail, and a small pile of double crosses. This is both good and bad. The good is in the turns. You learn what Ira learns, and new information shifts your perspective on events each time. A simple robbery involving rare postage stamps becomes something much darker and uglier by the end. The bad is in the reams of exposition and explanation; the movie is dialogue heavy. Characters habitually reference key players who never appear on screen, making some points difficult to follow. I imagine the climax might be unintelligible if you fall behind on who did what and why.

The plot is the plot, good and bad.

The movie's other pleasures are in its characters and stars. When Ira gets jumped following a lead, he threatens the guy who jumped him and he doesn't let it go. Carney offsets Ira's hard words with shaking hands and distracted gestures, layering anger over fear in a scene that would otherwise be boilerplate. Later, when Margo and Ira make progress on the case and he gives her a kind word, Margo reacts by filling the room with herself. Tomlin embraces the character's need, transforming Margo into a sorta human hummingbird as Ira shrinks from her. It's a moment that starts warm and goes cold and becomes warm again, where interplay matters more than dialogue.

The action is tame by today's standards, but the way Benson throws around blood packs and squibs, a quick punch and a fired gun have force behind them. There's also a measure of implied violence in the long blood trail Ira finds in an abandoned apartment, and in the nasty reveals around the home invasion at the center of the mystery.

The world of "The Late Show" is a seedy and broken, a version of Los Angeles that's about as unglamourous as you can get.
