---
title: "Who knew Art Carney had range?"
slug: "the-late-show-1977-who-knew-art-carney-had-range"
excerpt: "Well, presumably, the Academy voters who awarded him Best Actor knew, but did you know? If not, \"The Late Show\" (Warners, 1977) will demonstrate."
tags: noir, mystery
---

"The Late Show" (Warners, 1977) is a good little show, with a vibe straight from the pulps. Art Carney plays an aged private detective in Los Angeles and Lily Tomlin is a New Hollywood flake who dogs him about a cat. The plot is appropriately complex but builds to a satisfying finish. The movie is worth watching if you're a fan of either Carney or Tomlin, or neo-noirs from this period.

"The Late Show" has a TV cast and a TV title and sometimes a movie-of-the-week feel. The scope is small. A half dozen characters worry over a mystery that means nothing to nobody save them. Carney's detective gets pulled in when a friend appears on his doorstep gutshot and dying. Later, Tomlin tries to hire him to find her improbably missing cat. Carney refuses, but she hounds him _(enough with the canine puns---Ed.)_ until he relents. "I get $25 a day plus expenses because I'm the best and I get paid like the best," he tells her, and despite looking like a moth eaten Marlowe, I believed him. The story takes another turn when a pair of thugs arrive at Carney's rented rooms looking for Tomlin, but start shooting one another on the front lawn.

That was the first time the movie got me to sit up a little. Did somebody just get shot over a missing cat? Well, yes and no. One of the pleasures of the "The Late Show" is how writer-director Robert Benton fleshes out the larger story, which includes home invasion, murder, theft, blackmail, and a small pile of double crosses. Carney starts by looking for his friend's murderer and discovers much more. What appears to be a simple robbery involving the dead guy on the lawn becomes an uglier crime, and that ugly might have gotten his pal killed. The script does run into trouble when key characters are referenced multiple times in dialogue without ever appearing on screen. This makes some points difficult to follow, a not uncommon problem with mystery movies (eg: "The Big Sleep," 1946).
