---
title: "Who knew Art Carney had range?"
slug: "the-late-show-1977-who-knew-art-carney-had-range"
excerpt: "Well, presumably, Academy voters. But did you? If not, \"The Late Show\" will demonstrate."
tags: noir, mystery
---

"The Late Show" (Warners, 1977) is a good little show, with a vibe straight from the pulps. Art Carney plays Ira Wells, an aged private detective in Los Angeles. Lily Tomlin is Margo Sterling, a New Hollywood flake who dogs him about a cat. The plot is appropriately complex and builds to a satisfying finish. The movie is worth watching if you're a fan of either Carney or Tomlin, or neo-noirs from the 1970s.

"The Late Show" has a TV cast and a TV title and sometimes a movie-of-the-week feel. The scope is small. A half dozen characters worry over a mystery that means nothing to nobody. Carney's detective becomes involved when a friend appears on his doorstep dying of a gutshot. Soon after, Tomlin's Margo asks him to find her lost cat. The story kicks up when a pair of goons arrive at Ira's rented rooms looking for Margo, then suddenly turn on each other and begin shooting. One guy falls dead on the front lawn, the other bolts, and then...

Did somebody really get shot over a missing cat? Yes and no. One of the film's pleasures is in how writer-director Robert Benton fleshes out the larger story, which includes home invasion, murder, theft, blackmail, adultery, and a small pile of double crosses. Ira discovers the dead guy on the lawn might be connected to a much uglier crime. The script does run into trouble when key players are referenced without them ever appearing on screen, making some plot points difficult to follow.

The movie's other strengths lie in its two stars. When Ira gets jumped following a lead, he threatens the guy who jumped him and he doesn't let it go. Carney offsets Ira's hard words with shaking hands and distracted gestures, layering anger over fear. Later, when Margo and Ira make progress on the case and he offers her a kind word, Margo reacts by filling the room with outsized, ridiculous plans for them both. Tomlin embraces her character's need, and here Margo overcompensates, becoming a sorta human hummingbird as Ira shrinks from her. It's a moment that starts warm and goes cold and becomes warm again, as a reflection of the interplay between the actors.

The film's action is tame by today's standards, but the way Benson throws around blood packs and squibs, a quick punch and a fired gun have force behind them. There's also a measure of implied violence in the long blood trail Ira finds in an abandoned apartment, and in the nasty reveals around the home invasion at the center of the mystery.

The world of "The Late Show" is a seedy and broken, an LA that's about as unglamourous as you can get.
